UniPhier BL
===========

Preliminary Boot Loader for UniPhier 64bit SoCs.  This is supposed to be loaded
by the Boot ROM and run on the on-chip SRAM.  After basic initialization of SoC
and DRAM, this loader expands the next image onto the DRAM, then hands the
control over to it.  Typically, the next image is ARM Trusted Firmware BL1.


Why is this necessary?
----------------------

The UniPhier 64bit SoCs use ARM Trusted Firmware as the secure world firmware.
It provides various features with flexibility; however, the images become too
large to be run on the SRAM in some use-cases.

The Boot ROM on UniPhier SoCs loads 64KB[1] binary from a non-volatile device,
and runs it as the second stage loader.  This size is enough for the boot flow
without firmware image authentication.

On real products, it is important to verify images to prevent malformed software
from being run.  The reference implementation of the authentication is provided
by ARM Trusted Firmware TBBR.  Unfortunately, if the TBBR is enabled, the single
image of BL1/BL2 exceeds 64KB.

This loader has been introduced to solve the memory footprint problem.  The BL1
of ARM Trusted Firmware is GZIP-compressed and appended to this loader.  The
concatenated image fits within the 64KB limit.  This loader initializes the DRAM
and decompresses the BL1 onto the DRAM.  With this, there is no more image size
problem on the ARM Trusted Firmware side since every BL image runs on the DRAM.

[1]: The LD20 SoC is an exception; it loads 80KB.  However, we need to align
     the software implementation to the minimum case.


Boot flow
---------

1. The Boot ROM

  This is hard-wired ROM, so never malformed.  It loads the UniPhier BL (with
  piggy-backed BL1) onto the on-chip SRAM.  If the SoC is fused, the image is
  verified by the SoC own way.

2. UniPhier BL (this loader)

  This runs on the on-chip SRAM.  After the minimum SoC initialization and DRAM
  setup, it decompresses the piggy-backed BL1 image onto the DRAM, then jumps
  to the BL1 entry.

3. ARM Trusted Firmware BL1

  This runs on the DRAM.  This extracts the BL2 from a image container called
  FIP (Firmware Image Package), onto the DRAM.  If TBBR is enabled, the BL2 is
  authenticated in the standard mechanism of ARM Trusted Firmware.

4. ARM Trusted Firmware BL2

  This runs on the DRAM.  This loads more images such as BL31, BL33 (optionally
  BL32, SCP, etc.).  If TBBR is enabled, they are all authenticated in the
  standard mechanism of ARM Trusted Firmware.

5. ARM Trusted Firmware BL31 and more

  See ARM Trusted Firmware documentation for further boot sequence.


Compile
-------

Make sure you have AArch64 toolchains.  Then,

    $ make CROSS_COMPILE=<toolchain-prefix>

Unless `CROSS_COMPILE` is specified from the command line or the environments,
`aarch64-linux-gnu-` is assumed.


Configuration
-------------

No explicit configuration is needed before the compile.  The default set of
config symbols are defined in `config.mk` and should work well.  If desired,
you can tweak some options such as `CONFIG_DEBUG`, `CONFIG_LOGLEVEL`, etc.


Build options
-------------

- `CROSS_COMPILE=<prefix>`

  Specify the prefix of the toolchains.

- `O=<directory>`

  Specify the directory to store output files.  By default, all files generated
  during the build will be output in the source tree.  This option allows you
  to specify an alternate place for the output files.

- `V=<verbosity>`

  Set the build log verbosity.  The valid value is `0` or `1`.
  The default value is `0` (quiet).  The build log is printed in a short form.
  If it is set to `1` (verbose), the full log is displayed.


Environment variables
---------------------

- `CROSS_COMPILE`

  This can be set as an environment as well.

- `UNPH_OUTPUT`

  Equivalent to specifying `O=<directory>` from the command line.
  Setting `O=...` takes precedence over `UNPH_OUTPUT`.

- `UNPH_VERBOSE`

  Equivalent to specifying `V=<verbosity>` from the command line.
  Setting `V=...` takes precedence over `UNPH_VERBOSE`.


Output image
------------

Per-board images `bl_<board>.bin` are created.  Pick the appropriate one for
your board.


Generate final image
--------------------

To generate the ready-burn image, the GZIP-compressed BL1 image is also needed.
It is generated by running the following command in the ARM Trusted Firmware:

    $ make PLAT=uniphier CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- bl1_gzip

Then, concatenate the two as follows:

    $ cat bl_<board>.bin bl1_gzip  >  <final-image>

Then, burn the `<final-image>` at the beginning of the non-volatile device on
your board.  The device could be eMMC or NAND depending on your board spec.


Masahiro Yamada <yamada.masahiro@socionext.com>
